# Problem 42  - Coded Triangle Numbers

## Question
The nth term of the sequence of triangle numbers is given by, tn = ½n(n+1); so the first ten triangle numbers are:

* 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, ...

By converting each letter in a word to a number corresponding to its alphabetical position and adding these values we 
form a word value. For example, the word value for SKY is 19 + 11 + 25 = 55 = t10. If the word value is a triangle 
number then we shall call the word a triangle word.

Using words.txt (right click and 'Save Link/Target As...'), a 16K text file containing nearly two-thousand common 
English words, how many are triangle words?

## Solution
```python | euler_042.py
import string

def is_triangular(x):
    if (((8*x) + 1)**0.5) % 1 == 0:
        return True
    else:
        return False

def word_to_number(word):
    alphabet = list(string.ascii_lowercase)

    sum_of_positions = 0
    for w in word:
        position = alphabet.index(w.lower()) + 1
        sum_of_positions += position

    return sum_of_positions

with open("p042_words.txt", 'r') as f:
    words = f.read().replace('"', '')

triangle_count = 0
for w in words.split(","):
    value = word_to_number(w)
    if is_triangular(value):
        triangle_count += 1
```

## Discussion
* To identify if a number is triangular or not, we make use of this [function](#code1-l3). This formula was derived from 
[Triangular Roots and Tests](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triangular_number#Triangular_roots_and_tests_for_triangular_numbers). 
It states that an integer x is triangular if and only if 8x+1 is a square.
* We can get a number's square root by using `** 0.5` and to check if it is a whole number or not, we compare it to 
`% 1 == 0`.
> :Collapse label=short, Sample usage:
>
> ```python
> x = 3
> (((8*3) + 1) ** 0.5) % 1 == 0
> ((24 + 1) ** 0.5) % 1 == 0
> (25 ** 0.5) % 1 == 0
> 5 % 1 == 0
> 0 == 0
> # 3 is a triangle number
> 
> x = 4
> ((32 + 1) ** 0.5) % 1 == 0
> (33 ** 0.5) % 1 == 0
> 5.75 % 1 == 0
> 0.75 == 0
> # 4 is not a triangle number
> ```
* To convert each letter to a number corresponding to its alphabetical position, we use this [function](#code1-l9).
  * [`alphabet`](#code1-l10) is a list of characters that will help us identify a letter's position (['a', 'b', 'c', ...])
  * [We iterate through each of the letters of the word](#code1-l13) and [identify its position](#code1-l14) by getting 
  its index in the list and adding 1 (since indices start from zero). `.lower()` was used because `alphabet` is a list 
  of characters in lower case.
  * The positions are then added together to get the sum.
* [We open the file](#code1-l19) that contains the words that needs to be processed. It is stored in `words`, and the 
enclosing `"` are removed to make string parsing easier.
* To go through each word, we [split](#code1-l23) `words` into a list.
* We then get the value of each word, and finally check if it is a triangle number or not.


## Answer
> :Collapse label=answer, Show Answer
>
> 162

> :ToCPrevNext